\documentclass[12pt]{article}
\usepackage{fontspec}
\defaultfontfeatures{Ligatures=TeX}
\setmainfont{Times New Roman}
\usepackage{geometry}
\usepackage{setspace}
\usepackage{enumitem}
\usepackage[hidelinks]{hyperref}
\usepackage{titlesec}
\usepackage{nowidow}

% Widow and orphan control: minimum 3 lines per page
\setnowidow[4]
\setnoclub[4]
\widowpenalty=10000
\clubpenalty=10000
\brokenpenalty=10000
\interlinepenalty=1000 % Discourage breaks within paragraphs

% Set page geometry for 25-mm (1-inch) margins on A4 paper
\geometry{a4paper, margin=25mm}

% Double spacing
\doublespacing

% Section formatting
\titleformat{\section}{\large\bfseries}{\thesection}{1em}{}
\titleformat{\subsection}{\normalsize\bfseries}{\thesubsection}{1em}{}

% Title, author, and date
\title{The Dominant Themes and Intersecting Motifs \\ in the Book of Hebrews}
\author{Warwick Allen}
\date{28 June 2025}

\begin{document}

\maketitle

\begin{abstract}
The Book of Hebrews is a theologically rich New Testament epistle aimed at
encouraging early Jewish Christians to remain steadfast in their faith amidst
pressures to revert to Judaism. Six themes dominate the book: Christ’s
supremacy, the new covenant, Christ’s priesthood, faith and perseverance, the
call to holiness and worship, and the warning against rejecting Christ’s
sufficient atonement. These are unified by four interwoven motifs: rest,
covenant fulfillment, access to God’s presence, and perfection.

Hebrews extensively relies on the Old Testament, with 70--90\% of its content
engaging with the Old Testament. This grounds its claims, using Old Testament
scriptures to demonstrate Christ’s fulfillment of God’s redemptive plan.

The theme of Christ’s supremacy presents Him as superior to angels, Moses, and
the Levitical priesthood, fulfilling Old Testament promises and leading
believers into God’s rest. The new covenant, superior to the Mosaic Law, offers
forgiveness and direct access to God, completing Old Testament shadows and
enabling rest through faith. Christ’s eternal priesthood in the order of
Melchizedek surpasses the Levitical system, securing access to God’s presence
and perfecting believers. Faith and perseverance are urged through Old
Testament examples, with unbelief warned as barring entry to God’s rest. The
call to holiness and worship reflects gratitude for the new covenant, requiring
a life aligned with God’s presence. The warning against rejecting Christ’s
atonement emphasises the peril of relying on human works or the old sacrificial
system, which jeopardises redemption and rest.

The motifs unify these themes: rest symbolises salvation’s goal, covenant
fulfillment highlights Christ’s completion of Old Testament promises, access to
God’s presence emphasises relational intimacy, and perfection underscores
salvation’s completion. Each motif, rooted in Old Testament imagery, reinforces
Christ’s supremacy, the new covenant’s efficacy, and the necessity of faith,
warning against syncretism. Together, they create a cohesive narrative,
exhorting believers to trust fully in Christ’s finished work to enter God’s
rest, access His presence, and receive perfected salvation, fulfilling the Old
Testament’s promises.
\end{abstract}

\section{Introduction}
The Book of Hebrews, a profound epistle in the New Testament, is a theological
masterpiece crafted to encourage early Jewish Christians to remain steadfast in
their faith in Jesus Christ amidst pressures to revert to Judaism. After
discussing the book’s Old Testament foundation, this essay explores the six
most dominant themes in Hebrews---namely, the supremacy of Christ, the new
covenant, the priesthood of Christ, faith and perseverance, the call to
holiness and worship, and the critical warning against failing to trust fully
in Christ’s sufficient atonement. It also examines how the motifs of rest,
covenant fulfillment, access to God’s presence, and perfection interweave these
themes, serving as unifying threads that underscore the book’s message of
salvation through faith in Christ alone.

\section{Reliance on the Old Testament}
The Book of Hebrews heavily relies on the Old Testament to construct its
theological arguments, grounding its claims about Christ in the scriptures
familiar to its Jewish Christian audience. As John Calvin observes, ``The
Epistle to the Hebrews is a kind of commentary on the Old Testament, for it
explains how the figures and shadows of the Law are fulfilled in Christ, and
how the promises given to the fathers are accomplished in Him'' (Calvin 1853,
7). Approximately 30--40\% of Hebrews consists of direct Old Testament
quotations or explicit references, with an additional 40--50\% indirectly
referencing Old Testament concepts through themes, typology, or theological
frameworks, making roughly 70--90\% of the book engaged with the Old Testament
in some form. F.F. Bruce notes, ``The writer of Hebrews is saturated with the
Old Testament; he quotes it directly, alludes to it constantly, and assumes his
readers’ familiarity with its texts and themes to demonstrate the superiority
of Christ and His new covenant'' (Bruce 1964, 14). Hebrews includes at least 29
direct quotations from the Septuagint, drawn from texts like the Psalms,
Jeremiah, and Leviticus (e.g., Ps 95 in Heb 3:7--11; Jer 31:31--34 in Heb
8:8--12). These quotations, often introduced with phrases like ``as it is
written'' or ``the Holy Spirit says,'' emphasise their authoritative role.
Beyond direct quotes, Hebrews frequently alludes to Old Testament figures
(e.g., Melchizedek in Heb 7; Moses in Heb 3) and events (e.g., the wilderness
wandering in Heb 3--4), using them as types or shadows fulfilled in Christ.
Indirect references permeate the book’s discussions of the Law, sacrifices, and
priesthood, which assume familiarity with Old Testament institutions (e.g., Lev
16 in Heb 9). This pervasive Old Testament engagement anchors Hebrews’ argument
that Christ fulfills and surpasses the old covenant, making the Old Testament
indispensable to its message.

\section{The Supremacy of Christ}
At the heart of Hebrews lies the theme of Christ’s supremacy, portraying Him as
superior to all figures and institutions of the Old Testament. Hebrews 1:1--4
establishes Jesus as the eternal Son of God, the ultimate revelation who
surpasses angels, Moses, and the Levitical priesthood, fulfilling Old Testament
prophecies (e.g., Ps 2:7; 2 Sam 7:14). Charles Spurgeon declares, ``Jesus
Christ is set forth in Hebrews as above all angels, above Moses, above Aaron,
above all the shadows of the law, because He is the substance, the brightness
of the Father’s glory, and the express image of His person'' (Spurgeon 1871,
1012). As the creator and sustainer of all things, seated at God’s right hand
(Heb 1:3), Christ is the sole mediator of salvation. The motif of rest ties
directly to this theme, as Christ leads believers into God’s true rest,
surpassing the temporary rest of the Promised Land under Joshua (Heb 4:8--10,
referencing Ps 95). Covenant fulfillment underscores Christ’s role as the
culmination of Old Testament promises (Heb 1:1--2), as Augustine notes,
``Christ is the end of the law, the prophets, and the patriarchs; in Him all
things are fulfilled'' (Augustine 1887, 14.24). Access to God’s presence is
enabled by His exalted position (Heb 4:16), and perfection highlights Christ as
the pioneer of salvation, made ``perfect through suffering'' (Heb 2:10,
alluding to Old Testament suffering servant imagery).

\section{The New Covenant}
Hebrews contrasts the old covenant, rooted in the Mosaic Law, with the new
covenant established through Christ’s sacrifice. This new covenant is superior,
offering forgiveness and direct access to God (Heb 8:6--13, quoting Jer
31:31--34). John Owen affirms, ``The new covenant, as foretold by Jeremiah and
established by Christ, is the perfection of God’s promises, whereby sins are
forgiven, and the law is written on the heart, making the old covenant
obsolete'' (Owen 1854, 4:123). Hebrews 9:15 describes Christ as its mediator,
replacing the repetitive sacrifices of the old system (Lev 16) with His
once-for-all atonement. The motif of rest connects here, as the new covenant
enables believers to enter God’s rest through faith (Heb 4:3--5). Covenant
fulfillment is central, as the new covenant completes the Old Testament’s
temporary provisions (Heb 8:13). Access to God’s presence is a hallmark,
symbolised by the torn temple veil (Heb 10:19--22, referencing Old Testament
sanctuary imagery). Perfection is achieved through forgiveness, perfecting
believers’ consciences where the old covenant failed (Heb 10:1--4, 14), as R.C.
Sproul notes, ``The new covenant in Hebrews is the fulfillment of Jeremiah’s
prophecy, where Christ’s once-for-all sacrifice replaces the repeated offerings
of the old covenant'' (Sproul 1985, 45).

\section{The Priesthood of Christ}
Christ’s role as the eternal High Priest in the order of Melchizedek,
surpassing the Levitical priesthood, is a dominant theme. Hebrews 7:23--28,
referencing Ps 110:4, highlights His eternal priesthood, with His single
sacrifice perfecting believers forever (Heb 10:11--14). Philip Edgcumbe Hughes
states, ``The priesthood of Melchizedek, as expounded in Hebrews, reveals
Christ as the eternal priest who, by His own blood, secures an eternal
redemption'' (Hughes 1977, 258). This priesthood grants access to God’s
presence (Heb 4:14--16), central to the motif of rest, as the
\textit{sabbatismos} of Heb 4:9--10 reflects God’s Sabbath rest, shared through
Christ’s priestly work (Gen 2:2). Athanasius adds, ``Christ, as the eternal
High Priest after the order of Melchizedek, has offered Himself as the perfect
sacrifice, entering the heavenly sanctuary to intercede for us forever''
(Athanasius 2011, 9.2). Covenant fulfillment is evident, as Christ’s priesthood
completes the Aaronic system (Heb 7:11--22). Access to God’s presence is
secured by His mediation (Heb 10:19), and perfection is achieved, as His
priesthood makes believers complete (Heb 7:19, 28).

\section{Faith and Perseverance}
Hebrews emphasises faith and perseverance, particularly in trials. Chapter 11
recounts Old Testament figures who, despite significant failures and moral
shortcomings, exemplified enduring faith, encouraging believers to persevere
(Heb 10:19--39). Martin Luther observes, ``Faith, as Hebrews 11 teaches, is the
substance of things hoped for, and by it the saints of old trusted God’s
promises, looking forward to Christ'' (Luther 1968, 26). The motif of rest is
linked, as Heb 3:12--19, citing Ps 95, warns that unbelief prevents entry into
God’s rest, while Heb 4:2--3 assures that faith secures it. John Wesley adds,
``The faith of the patriarchs, as recounted in Hebrews, is our example to
persevere in trusting Christ, for without faith it is impossible to please
God'' (Wesley 1755, Heb 11:6). Covenant fulfillment connects, as faith in
Christ’s work secures Old Testament promises (Heb 11:39--40). Access to God’s
presence is accessed through faith (Heb 4:16), and perseverance ensures
continued access (Heb 10:22). Perfection is received by faith, as believers
await completion through Christ (Heb 11:40).

\section{The Call to Holiness and Worship}
The call to holiness and worship urges believers to reflect their access to
God’s presence. Hebrews 12:14, echoing Old Testament purity laws, exhorts
holiness, while Heb 12:28--29 calls for worship with ``reverence and awe.''
Jonathan Edwards notes, ``True holiness, as urged in Hebrews, is the fruit of
faith in Christ’s redemption, whereby we live to God’s glory and worship Him in
reverence'' (Edwards 1959, 2.3). The motif of rest complements this, as
entering God’s rest involves obedience and devotion (Heb 12:28). Covenant
fulfillment inspires holiness, reflecting gratitude for the fulfilled covenant.
Access to God’s presence requires holiness (Heb 12:14) and is expressed through
worship, as R.C. Sproul affirms, ``Holiness is not optional for the Christian;
Hebrews 12:14 declares it essential to see the Lord'' (Sproul 1985, 112).
Perfection relates indirectly, as holiness reflects sanctification tied to
Christ’s perfecting work (Heb 10:14).

\section{Warning Against Rejecting Christ’s Sufficient Atonement}
The warning against failing to accept Christ’s atoning work as sufficient,
particularly by turning to human works or the Levitical system, is critical.
Hebrews 10:1--4, referencing Leviticus, explains that old covenant sacrifices
were shadows, while Christ’s sacrifice is definitive (Heb 10:10--14). John
Calvin warns, ``To reject Christ’s sacrifice is to trample underfoot the blood
of the covenant, for there remains no other sacrifice for sins'' (Calvin 1853,
245). Rejecting this truth risks peril (Heb 6:4--6, 10:26--31). Gareth Lee
Cockerill adds, ``To spurn Christ’s once-for-all sacrifice, as Hebrews warns,
is to reject the only means of atonement, incurring a judgment far greater than
under the old covenant'' (Cockerill 2012, 482). A stark warning is proffered:
unbelief or syncretism bars entry into God’s rest (Heb 3:7--19, 4:1--11).
Covenant fulfillment underscores the danger, as rejecting Christ’s sacrifice
negates the fulfilled covenant (Heb 10:29). Access to God’s presence is
jeopardised by reverting to works (Heb 10:19--22), and perfection is forfeited
by rejecting Christ’s sacrifice (Heb 10:26--31).

\section{The Motifs as Unifying Threads}
The motifs of rest, covenant fulfillment, access to God’s presence, and
perfection unify the six themes, each illuminating a facet of Christ’s work.
F.F. Bruce observes, ``The rest promised in Hebrews is the ultimate fulfillment
of God’s Sabbath, entered through faith in Christ, who fulfills the Old
Testament’s types and opens the heavenly sanctuary to believers'' (Bruce 1964,
96). John Owen adds, ``Christ’s priesthood and sacrifice grant access to God’s
presence, fulfilling the old covenant’s shadows and perfecting believers''
(Owen 1854, 3:89):
\begin{itemize}
    \item \textbf{Rest} (\textit{katapausis} and \textit{sabbatismos}, Heb 4:9)
    symbolises salvation’s goal, entered through Christ’s supremacy, the new
    covenant, and priesthood, dependent on faith, exhibited in holiness, and
    jeopardised by unbelief, framed by Old Testament references (e.g., Ps 95).
    \item \textbf{Covenant fulfillment} highlights Christ’s completion of Old
    Testament promises, surpassing the old covenant through His supremacy,
    priesthood, and new covenant, requiring faith and inspiring holiness, with
    warnings against rejecting the fulfilled covenant (e.g., Jer 31).
    \item \textbf{Access to God’s presence} emphasises salvation’s relational
    aspect, enabled by Christ’s mediation, secured through the new covenant and
    priesthood, accessed by faith, expressed in holiness, and lost through
    syncretism, rooted in Old Testament sanctuary imagery.
    \item \textbf{Perfection} underscores salvation’s completion, achieved by
    Christ’s supremacy, priesthood, and new covenant, received through faith,
    reflected in holiness, and forfeited by rejecting His atonement, contrasting
    with the Old Testament’s ineffective sacrifices.
\end{itemize}
Rest is experiential, symbolising salvation’s goal; covenant fulfillment is
theological, focusing on Old Testament fulfillment; access to God’s presence is
relational, emphasising intimacy; and perfection is soteriological,
highlighting completion. These motifs, grounded in the Old Testament, create a
cohesive narrative exalting Christ.

\section{Conclusion}
The Book of Hebrews weaves a rich theological tapestry, heavily reliant on the
Old Testament, with the supremacy of Christ, the new covenant, His priesthood,
faith and perseverance, the call to holiness, and the warning against rejecting
His sufficient atonement forming its core themes. The motifs of rest, covenant
fulfillment, access to God’s presence, and perfection, anchored in Old
Testament quotations and references, illustrate the consequences of accepting
or rejecting Christ’s completed work. They underscore the necessity of faith,
the sufficiency of Christ’s sacrifice, and the call to live holy lives in
anticipation of the ultimate Sabbath rest, fulfilled covenant, divine access,
and perfected salvation. By integrating these themes and motifs, Hebrews
exhorts believers to hold fast to Christ, trusting fully in His atonement to
receive God’s promised blessings.

\begin{thebibliography}{}
\bibitem{Athanasius2011}
Athanasius. \emph{On the Incarnation}. Translated by John Behr. Popular
Patristics Series 44. Yonkers, NY: St Vladimir’s Seminary Press, 2011.

\bibitem{Augustine1887}
Augustine. \emph{On the Spirit and the Letter}. Translated by Peter Holmes and
Robert Ernest Wallis. In \emph{Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers}, First Series,
vol. 5, edited by Philip Schaff, 83--114. Buffalo, NY: Christian Literature
Publishing, 1887.

\bibitem{Bruce1964}
Bruce, F. F. \emph{The Epistle to the Hebrews}. New International Commentary on
the New Testament. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964.

\bibitem{Calvin1853}
Calvin, John. \emph{Commentaries on the Epistle to the Hebrews}. Translated by
John Owen. Edinburgh: Calvin Translation Society, 1853.

\bibitem{Cockerill2012}
Cockerill, Gareth Lee. \emph{The Epistle to the Hebrews}. New International
Commentary on the New Testament. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2012.

\bibitem{Edwards1959}
Edwards, Jonathan. \emph{A Treatise Concerning Religious Affections}. In
\emph{The Works of Jonathan Edwards}, vol. 2, edited by John E. Smith. New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1959.

\bibitem{Hughes1977}
Hughes, Philip Edgcumbe. \emph{A Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews}.
Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1977.

\bibitem{Luther1968}
Luther, Martin. \emph{Lectures on Hebrews}. In \emph{Luther’s Works}, vol. 29,
edited by Jaroslav Pelikan, 109--241. St. Louis: Concordia, 1968.

\bibitem{Owen1854}
Owen, John. \emph{An Exposition of the Epistle to the Hebrews}. 7 vols.
Edinburgh: Johnstone \& Hunter, 1854--1855.

\bibitem{Sproul1985}
Sproul, R. C. \emph{The Holiness of God}. Wheaton, IL: Tyndale House, 1985.

\bibitem{Spurgeon1871}
Spurgeon, Charles H. ``The Brightness of His Glory.'' \emph{The Metropolitan
Tabernacle Pulpit Sermons} 17:1009--1016. London: Passmore \& Alabaster, 1871.

\bibitem{Wesley1755}
Wesley, John. \emph{Explanatory Notes upon the New Testament}. London: Epworth,
1755.
\end{thebibliography}

\end{document}
